hero: 02 - Set, Functions & Groups

# Set, Functions & Groups
Collection of well defined objects is called set.

## Ways of Describing a Set
* **Descriptive Method:** In this method the set can be described in words.

    For Example: The set of natural numbers.

* **Tabular Method:** In this method the set is described by listing its elements with in brackets.

    For Example: Set of natural numbers $=\{a,e,i,o,u\}$

* **Set Builder Method:** In this method a symbol or letter is used for an arbitrary member of the set and stating the property common to all members of the set.

    For Example: Set of natural numbers $=\{x | x$ is a vowel of the English alphabets $\}$

## Set of Numbers

* **Natural numbers** $N=\{1,2,3,...\}$
* **Whole numbers** $W=\{0,1,2,3,...\}$
* **Integers** $Z=\{0,\pm1,\pm2,\pm3,...\}$
* **Positive integers** $Z^+=\{0,+1,+2,+3,...\}$
* **Negative integers** $Z^-=\{0,-1,-2,-3,...\}$
* **Odd numbers** $O=\{1,3,5,...\}$
* **Even numbers** $E=\{0,2,4,...\}$
* **Prime numbers** $E=\{2,3,5,7,11,13,...\}$
* **Rational numbers** $$ Q=\lbrace x \| x=\frac{p}{q}, p, q \in Z, q\rlap{/}{=}0 \rbrace $$
* **Irrational numbers** $$ Q'=\lbrace x \| x\rlap{/}{=}\frac{p}{q}, p, q \in Z, q\rlap{/}{=}0 \rbrace $$
* **Real numbers** $R=Q \cup Q'$

## Terms Regarding Sets
* **Order of Set:** The number of elements present in a set is called order of set.
* **Finite Set:** If a set has definite number of elements present in it. **Example:** $\{1,2,3,...,999\}$
* **Infinite Sets:** If a set has indefinite number of elements present in it. **Example:** $\{1,2,3,...,n\}$
* **Null or Empty Set:** A set having no element. It is denoted by $\phi$.
* **Singleton Set:** A set having only one element. **Example:** $\{7\}$.
* **Equal Sets:** Two sets $A$ & $B$ are equal iff they have same elements. **Example:** If $A=\{1,2,3\}$ & $B=\{2,1,3\}$ then $A=B$.
* **Equivalent or Similar Set:** Two sets $A$ & $B$ are equivalent iff a one to one correspondence exits between the elements of the sets. **Example:** If $A=\{1,2,3,4,5\}$ & $B=\{a,e,i,o,u\}$ then $A~B$.
* **Subset:** If every element of a set $A$ is an element of set $B$, then $A$ is a subset of $B$ written as $A\subseteq B$. **Example:** If $A=\{1,2,3\}$ & $B=\{1,2,3,...,10\}$ then $A\subseteq B$.
* **Proper Subset:** If $A\subseteq B$ and $B$ contains at least one element which is not an element of set $A$ then $A$ is called proper subset of $B$. **Example:** If $A=\{1,2,3\}$ & $B=\{1,2,3,...,10\}$ then $A\subseteq B$.
* **Improper Subset:** Two equal set are called Improper Subsets.
* **Power Set:** The collection of all proper and improper subsets of a set is called power set. It is denoted by $P(A)$. If a set has $n$ elements its power set will has $2^n$ elements. **Example:** If $A=\{a,b\}$ then $P(A)=$$\{\phi, \{a\}, \{b\}, \{a,b\} \}$
* **Universal Set** or **Universe of Discourse:** The super set of all the sets under a discussion. It is denoted by $U$.

!!! info
    **Natural numbers** are subset of **Integers**, are subset of **Rational numbers**, are subset of **Real numbers**, are subset of **Complex numbers**
    $$ N\subset Z\subset Q\subset R \subset C $$

## Operations on Sets
* **Union of Sets:** Union of sets $A$ & $B$, denoted by $A\cup B$, is the set of all the elements belongs to both $A$ & $B$. Symbolically: $$ A\cup B= \\\{x | x \in A \land x\in B \\\} $$
* **Intersection of Sets:**
