hero: 03 - Matrices & Determinants

# Matrices & Determinants


## Introduction

| Name of Mathematician | Work in matrices |
|-----------------------|------------------|
| James Sylvester (1814-1897) | Used the word matrix first time |
| Arthur Cayley (1821-1895)   | Used in linear transformations |
| Seki Kowa (1642-1708) | Concept of determinants |
| Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-716) | Inventions of the determinants |
| Gabriel Crammer (1704-1752) | Used determinants for solving system of linear equations |


## Matrix

* A rectangular array of numbers enclosed by a pair of brackets is called matrix.

**OR**

* Arrangement of numbers in rows and columns is called a matrix.


## Rows
* The horizontal lines of numbers are called rows of matrix.

## Columns
* The vertical lines of numbers are called columns of Matrix

## Entries or Elements
* The numbers used in rows or columns are said to be the entries or elements of the matrix.

## Order of a Matrix
* Order of matrix is defined as

$$ \text{Number of rows} \times \text{Number of columns} $$

## General definition of a matrix
* Generally a brackets rectangular array of $m \times n$ elements $a_n$ ($i=1,2,3,4...n$), arranged in $m$ rows and $n$ columns is called an $m$ by $n$ matrix (written as $m \times n$ matrix).

$$ \begin{bmatrix} a_{11} & a_{12} & \dots & a_{1n} \\ a_{21} & a_{22} & \dots & a_{2n} \\ \vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\ a_{m1} & a_{m2} & \dots & a_{mn} \end{bmatrix} $$

## Types of Matrices

### Row matrix
A matrix which has only one row (ie $1\times n$ matrix) is said to be a row matrix. For example:

$$ [1, 2, 3, 4] $$

### Column matrix
A matrix which has only one column (ie an $m\times 1$ matrix) is said to be a column matrix or column vector. For example:

$$ \begin{bmatrix} 1 \\ 2 \\ 3 \\ 4 \end{bmatrix} $$

### Square matrix
The matrix which has the same number of rows and columns, is called a square matrix.

**OR**

If $m=n$ then the matrix of order $m\times n$ is said yo be a square matrix of order $n$ or $m$. For example:

$$ \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 & 3 \\ 4 & 5 & 6 \\ 7 & 8 & 9 \end{bmatrix} $$


### Rectangular matrix
A matrix, whose number of rows is not equal to number of rows is not equal to number of columns, is called a rectangular matrix.

**OR**

If $m\not =$, then the matrix is called rectangular matrix of order $m \times n$. For example:


$$ \begin{bmatrix} 2 & -1 & 7 \\ 9 & 5 & -1 \end{bmatrix} $$
