hero: 05 - Partial Fraction

# Partial Fraction
* To express a single rational fraction as a sum of two or more rational fractions is called Partial fraction.
* Expressing a rational function as a sum of partial fraction is called Partial Fraction Resolution.
* It plays an important part in the study of calculus

## Terms Regarding Partial Fraction
* **Conditional Equation:** It is an equation is which two two algebraic expressions are equal for particular values of variables.

    **Example:** $2x=3$

* **Identity:** An equation that is true for all the value of $x$ is called identity.

    **Example:** $(x+3)(x+4)=x^2+7x+12$

* **Rational Fraction:** The quotient of two polynomials $\frac{P(x)}{Q(x)}$, $Q\rlap{/}{=}0$ with no common factors, is called a rational fraction. Rational fractions are of two types.

    **Example:** <span class="ld">$$ \frac{x^3 - x^2 + x+1}{x^2 + 5} $$</span>

* **Proper Fraction:** The rational fraction $\frac{P(x)}{Q(x)}$ is called proper if degree of numerator ($P(x)$) is less than degree of denominator ($Q(x)$).

    **Example:** <span class="ld">$$ \frac{2x-5}{x^2+4} $$</span>

* **Improper Fraction:** The rational fraction $\frac{P(x)}{q(x)}$ is called proper if degree of numerator ($P(x)$) is greater than or equal to degree of denominator ($Q(x)$).

    **Example:** <span class="ld">$$ \frac{x}{2x-3} $$</span>

## Partial Fraction Resolution.
Following are the main points of resolving a rational fraction $\frac{P(x)}{Q(x)}$ into partial fraction:

* The degree of $P(x)$ should be less than the degree of $Q(x)$. If not, divide and work with reminder theorem.
* Clear the given equation of fractions.
* Equate the coefficients of like terms (power of $x$)
* Solve the resulting equation for coefficients.

There are following cases of partial fraction resolution from a rational fraction $$ \frac{P(x)}{Q(x)} $$

### Case 1
**When $Q(x)$ has only non-repeating linear factors**

#### Example
$$ \frac{x-7}{(x-1)(x+2)} $$

#### Solution
This case can be solved easily by using cover up method:

* As we known the above equation will be written as: $$ \frac{x-7}{(x-1)(x+2)}=\frac{A}{x-1}+\frac{B}{x+2} $$
* To find $A$ cover $x-1$ and put $x=1$ on right side: $$ \frac{(1)-7}{(1)+2}=\frac{-6}{3}=-2 $$
* To find $B$ cover $x+2$ and put $x=-2$ on right side: $$ \frac{(-2)-7}{(-2)-1}=\frac{-9}{-3}=3 $$
* So $$ \frac{x-7}{(x-1)(x+2)}=\frac{-2}{x-1}+\frac{3}{x+2} $$

### Case 2
**When $Q(x)$ has repeating linear factors**

#### Example
$$ \frac{x^2 + x-1}{(x+2)^3} $$

#### Solution
Checkout textbook solution.


### Case 3
**When $Q(x)$ has non-repeating irreducible quadratic factors**

#### Example
$$ \frac{3x-11}{(x^2 +1)(x+3)} $$

#### Solution
Checkout textbook solution.

### Case 4
**When $Q(x)$ has repeating irreducible quadratic factors**

#### Example
$$ \frac{3x-11}{(x^2 +1)^2(x+3)} $$

#### Solution
Checkout textbook solution.
