hero: 01 - Introduction to Computers

# Introduction to Computers
## Data & Information
* The collection of raw facts and figures is called **Data**.
* The processed data is called **Information**.

## Data Processing
* The process of converting data into information by processing it is called **data processing**.
* Anything that processes data is called **Processor**.
* The basic steps of data processing are:
    * Input (Data)
    * Process
    * Output (Information)

## Computer
* A machine that can be programmed to except data, process it, output the information & store it for later use.
* Primary Components of Computer:
    * **Input Device:** A device that is used to input data to the computer.
    * **Output Device:** A device used to display output of processing
    * **Processing Device:** A device used to process data.
    * **Storage Device:** A device that holds data is called storage device.

## Information Technology
* A technology that uses computing with high speed communication links to spread information from one place to another.
* Merging of various industries electronically is called **Digital Convergence**.

## Software
* A set of instruction given to the computer to perform a specific task is called **Software**.
* There are two types of Software:
    * System Software
    * Application Software

### System Software
* It is a type of software which has direct concerns with computer hardware.
* A few types of System software are given below:
    * **Operating Systems:** Manages computer hardware and software resources and provides common services for computer programs.
    * **Device Drivers:** Operates or controls a particular type of device that is attached to a computer.
    * **Utility Software:** Designed to help analyze, configure, optimize or maintain a computer.

### Application Software
* It is a type of that is designed to perform a group of coordinated functions, tasks, or activities for the benefit of the user.
* Following are few types of application software:
    * **Customization Software:** Designed for particular customer or Organization.
    * **Package Software:** Developed for general public.
