hero: 23 - File Handling

# File Handling
## Stream
* A logical interface to a file is called **Stream**.
* A sequence of characters from input device is called **Input Stream**.
* A sequence from computer to output device is called **Output Stream**.
* A stream is associated with file using `open` statement.
* A stream is disassociated from file using `close` statement.
* There following types of streams in C language:
    * Text Stream
    * Binary Stream

### Text Stream
* It is a sequence of characters.
* A certain character translation may occur in text stream.
* It can only be used for text data
* It is less efficient than binary stream.

### Binary Stream
* It is sequence of bytes.
* It has one-to-one relationship with external devices.
* No translation occurs in binary stream.
* It is more efficient than text stream.
* It can be used for different types of data.

## File access methods
There are following methods to access a file:

* **Sequential Access Method:** It is used to access data is exact same sequence it is written.
* **Random Access Method:** It is used to access any data item directly without accessing the preceding data.

## EOL & EOF
* **EOL:** It is character used to define end of line (At end of every line).
* **EOF:** It is character used to define end of file (At end of file).


## Data file
* A collection of related records is called data file.
* It is a permanent storage of data.
* It can store any type of data.
* A type of data that stores data as printable and readable characters is called **text file**.

## Pointer
* A pointer is a variable whose value is the address of another variable.
* It is initialized by:
```c
int *pointer_var;
```
* Memory address of a variable is given by:
```c
pointer_var = &var_name
```
* Value in memory cell is given by:
```c
data = *pointer_var
```
* Here is full code example:
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main () {

   int  var = 20;   /* actual variable declaration */
   int  *ip;        /* pointer variable declaration */

   ip = &var;  /* store address of var in pointer variable*/

   printf("Address of var variable: %x\n", &var  );

   /* address stored in pointer variable */
   printf("Address stored in ip variable: %x\n", ip );

   /* access the value using the pointer */
   printf("Value of *ip variable: %d\n", *ip );

   return 0;
}

```
**Output**
```
Address of var variable: bffd8b3c
Address stored in ip variable: bffd8b3c
Value of *ip variable: 20
```

### File Pointer
* It is a pointer that refers to a file in secondary storage
* It is variable of type `FILE` that is defined in `stdio.h`
* A program has to declare a file pointer to use a file.
* One file pointer can only refer to one data file.
* A file pointer variable is initialized by:
```c
FILE *file
```

## File Functions

### `fopen`
`fopen` is used to open a file from further processing.

```c
file_pointer = fopen(file_name, mode);
```

* **file_pointer** is the name of file pointer declared in the program.
* **file_name** is the name of data file to be opened.
* **mode** is the mode in which file is to be opened.

| Mode | Function |
|------|----------|
| `r` | opened in read mode, data can't be modified, file must already exists |
| `w` | opened in write mode, data can be written, existing data will be destroyed |
| `a` | opened in append mode, data can't be read, data will be added at the end of existing data |
| `r+` | opened in read/write mode, data can be read or written, file must exist already |
| `w+` | opened in read/write mode, data can be read, existing data will be destroyed |
| `a+` | opened in append mode, data can be append at the end of file, existing data can also be read. |


### `fclose`
It is used to close connection between file and program.
```c
fclose(file_pointer);
```

* `file_pointer` pointer to the file to be closed.

### `fputc`
Writes a character to a file
```c
fputc(char, file_pointer);
```

* `char` char to be written.
* `file_pointer` of file where to written

### `fputs`
Writes a string to a file.
```c
fputs(string, file_pointer)
```
* `string` to be written
* `file_pointer` of file where to written

### `fprintf`
Writes a formatted string to file.
```c
fprintf(file_pointer, control_string, ...write_list)
```

* `file_pointer` of file where to written
* `control_string` unformatted string containing formate specifiers.
* `write_list` list of constants, variable & expressions to formate string.

### `fscanf`
