hero: 07 - Oscillations

# Oscillations

## Simple Harmonic Motion  
Such type of vibratory motion in which restoring force is directly proportional to the displacement from the mean position and it always acts towards the mean position.

* Vibratory motion is that in which a body moves to and fro about a fixed position along same path. Examples:
    - Motion of simple pendulum.
    - Motion of molecules of a solid.
* Simple harmonic motion (S.H.M) is a special type of vibratory motion in which:

   $$ a\propto -x\quad and\quad a\quad\text{is directed towards mean position.} $$


 * Restoring force is always directed towards mean position hence assigned negative sign.
 * Periodic motion is that which repeats itself after equal time intervals.
 * Vibration is one complete round trip of a body about its mean position.
 * Time period is defined as time taken by vibrating body to complete its one vibration and denoted by $T$.
 * Frequency is number of vibrations per second and denoted by $f$ so $f$ =$\frac{1}{T}$. Its unit is $\text{Hz}$. Other units are $vibration/s$, $cycle/s$, $rev/s$.
 * Amplitude is maximum distance from mean position.
 * Angular frequency is $\omega=2\pi/T\rightarrow\omega=2\pi f$
 * Phase is the angle which specifies the displacement and direction of motion of the point executing S.H.M i.e. phase = $\theta$ = $\omega t$
 * Initial angle at $t = 0$ is called phase constant and denoted by $\varphi$
 * If phase constant $\phi=-90^{o}$, then displacement $x=x_o \sin (\omega t+90^{o})= x_o \cos\omega t$, and simple harmonic oscillator starts its SHM from positive extreme position.


## Horizontal Mass-Spring System

* For spring, Hooke's law states that:
  $$ strain\propto stress\space\text{(within elastic limit)} $$
  $$ F=kx $$
   Where $k$=$\frac{F}{x}$ is called spring constant or force constant. If a spring is cut into two equal parts then spring constant of each spring is doubled.
* Mass attached to spring has S.H.M, $$ a=-\frac{k}{m}x $$.

* For spring mass system doing S.H.M, $$ \omega=\sqrt\frac{k}{m} $$
   $$ a\propto -x $$

* Mass spring system has S.H.M and we can trace its waveform (pictorial) display between time and displacement for S.H.M by following relation:
 $$ x=x_o\sin\bigg(\frac{2\pi}{T}\bigg)t $$  

## Spring in Series

 The resultant of spring constant in case of the series combination is
 $$ \frac{1}{k}=\frac{1}{k_1}+\frac{1}{k_2}+..... $$

## Spring in Parallel

The resultant of spring constant in case of the parallel combination is
 $$ k=k_1 + k_2+..... $$

This behaviour of springs resembles with capacitances in series and in parallel combinations.       

* Time period of single mass attached to spring is given as:$\quad$ $T=2\pi\sqrt\frac{m}{k}$

 $$ T\propto\sqrt{m}\qquad T\propto\frac{1}{\sqrt{k}} $$

 Its displacement is given as: $\quad x=x_o\sin\omega t$.

* Instantaneous velocity of mass $m$ attached to a spring is given as:

 $$ v_{ins}=\sqrt{\frac{k}{m}(x^{2}_o -x^{2})} $$

 $$ or\space v_{ins}=\sqrt\frac{k}{m}x_o\sqrt{1-\frac{x^ {2} }{x^ {2}_o}} $$

 $$ or\space v_{ins}= v_{max}\sqrt{1-\frac{x^ {2} }{x^ {2}_o}} $$

 * Maximum speed of mass attached to spring is given as:

 $$ v_{max}= v_o= x_o\sqrt\frac{k}{m} $$

 * Instantaneous velocity of spring-mass system doing S.H.M is proportional to constant of proportionality being the maximum velocity.

 $$ \sqrt{1-\frac{x^ {2}}{x^ {2}_o}} $$

 * In case of vertical spring,$\space F=mg=kx$

 $$ \frac{m}{k}=\frac{x}{g}\quad(Here\space x\space is\space elongation) $$

 *  Then time period will be $\qquad T=2\pi\sqrt\frac{x}{g}$

!!! question "Do you know?"
     In one complete vibration, a body covers a distance equal to four times of the amplitude.

## Motion of Projection of a Body Moving in a Circle on Diameter

 * Motion of projection of a body moving in a circle, on the diameter with constant speed is S.H.M.
 * Its acceleration is given as: $\qquad a= -\omega^{2}x$
 * Time period of projection is given as: $\qquad T=\frac{2\pi}{\omega}$
 * Speed of projection is given as:

 $$ v=\omega\sqrt{{r^ {2}}-{x^ {2}}}\space where\space r=radius\space of\space the\space circle=amplitude\space of\space S.H.M $$

 * Projection speeds up when moving towards the centre of the circle.
 * Projection slows down when moving away from the centre of the circle.
 * If speed $\omega$ of body in circular motion is not constant then projection does not have S.H.M but has vibratory motion, which is non-S.H.M.   

## Simple Pendulum

 It consists of a heavy point mass suspended from a rigid support by means of almost weightless and inextensible string.

 * Galileo invented simple pendulum.
 * Motion of simple pendulum is S.H.M if there is no damping.
 * Damping force reduces the amplitude of simple pendulum continuously and finally its motion is stopped.
 * In absence of damping force, restoring force on simple pendulum is given as;
  $F_r= -mg\sin\theta$, and for small amplitude oscillations $F_r = -mg\theta$.
 * Equation of acceleration of simple pendulum for small amplitude is;
  $a = -\frac{g}{l}x$

 Thus $\omega =\sqrt\frac{g}{l}$ for simple pendulum and does not depend on mass like the mass-spring system does.

 * Time period and frequency of simple pendulum are given as;

 $$ T=2\pi\sqrt\frac{l}{g}\quad and\quad f=\frac{1}{2\pi}\sqrt\frac{g}{l} $$

 * If amplitude of simple pendulum is not small then, it has non-S.H.M as $a= -g\sin h$ and we know that $\sin\theta=\theta$ only when $\theta$ is small.
 * Pendulum Suspended in a Lift: If the pendulum is suspended in a lift ascending up with uniform acceleration $'a'$ then its time-period is

 $$ T=2\pi\sqrt\frac{l}{g+a} $$

 * If the pendulum is suspended in a lift descending down with acceleration $'a'$ then

 $$ T=2\pi\sqrt\frac{l}{g-a} $$

!!! question "Do you know?"
    The time period of simple pendulum is independent of its mass and its amplitude.

## Kinds of Pendulum

 1. Simple pendulum
 2. Compound pendulum or physical pendulum
 3. Torsion Pendulum

A second pendulum has following characteristics:

 1. Time period$= 2s$
 2. Frequency$= 0.5 Hz$
 3. Length$= 0.99\;\text{or}\;1m$

## Energy Conservation in S.H.M

 * Its K.E is given as

$$ K.E_{inst}= \frac{1}{2}k x^{2}_o\bigg(1-\frac{x^ {2}}{x^ {2}_o}\bigg) $$

$$ K.E_{max}=\frac{1}{2}k x^{2}_o \quad \text{It is at mean position} $$

$$ K.E_{min}=0 \qquad\text{It is at extreme position} $$

$$ K.E_{inst}= K.E_{max}\bigg(1-\frac{x^ {2}}{x^ {2}_o}\bigg) $$

 * Its P.E is given as

$$ P.E_{inst}=\frac{1}{2}kx^{2} $$

$$ P.E_{max}=\frac{1}{2}k x^{2}_o \quad\text{It is at extreme position} $$

$$ P.E_{min}= 0 \qquad\text{It is at mean position} $$

 * Total energy of system =$\frac{1}{2}k x^{2}_o$ energy remain conserve in S.H.M. In one vibration K.E attains its maximum value twice.

## Free & Forced Oscillations

 * Oscillations of a system is called free vibration if it oscillates without the interference of an external force.
 * Frequency of free oscillation is called natural frequency of the system.
 * When a system performs oscillation in the presence of external periodic force, its vibration is called forced oscillation.
 * A physical system under going forced vibration is known as driven harmonic oscillator.

## Damped Oscillation

Such oscillations in which the amplitude decreases steadily with time are called as damped oscillations.

 * In shock absorber of a car critical damping is applied.

## Resonance

Phenomenon of increase in amplitude of a body (capable of vibrating) under the action of a periodic force whose time period is equal to natural time period of body.

$$ OR $$

Specific response of a system to external periodic force whose time period is equal to natural time period of a body.

$$ OR $$

Process in which one body transfers its vibrations to nearby body whose natural time period is agreeable to it.

!!! question "Do you know?"
    Damping is a process where energy is dissipated from the oscillating system.

* For tuning circuit of T.V or radio or mobile phone, elctrical resonance takes place at following frequency:

 $$ f=\frac{1}{2\pi\sqrt{LC}} $$

* Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a resonance phenomenon using radio frequency waves. It is less damaging than X-rays imaging process.
* Suspension bridge may break down due to vibration with increased amplitude caused by resonance.
* We get tired on walking briskly because of forced oscillations fed into our legs for resonance.
* Loose parts of car produce noise at specific speed due to resonance.

!!! question "Do you know?"
    A microwave oven generates high frequency waves, which heats up water and fat molecules, by large energy absorption, and hence food is cooked.

## Sharpness of Resonance

* Amplitude of vibration decreases with damping force.
* Amplitude of vibration remain constant with undamped force.
* Smaller the damped force, sharper is the resonance and vice versa.